Backend
Engineering
Interview Guide

Welcome! We’re excited to have you interview with our team.

For your upcoming interviews, we want to ensure you’re adequately prepared for
each step of the process.

Our engineering process consists of the following:

   · Two coding interviews

   · One system design interview

   · One management interview

   · One values interview

To fully understand which stage of the interview process you’re in and what’s expected, we

recommend thoroughly reviewing each email your coordinator sends.

Coding
Interview 1

60 minutes

Coding
Interview 2

System Design
Interview

Management
Interview

60 minutes

60 minutes

60 minutes

Values
Interview

45 minutes

Interview details and preparation

CODING INTERVIEWS

This interview requires you to write and execute code. Be prepared with an IDE set up on your

computer that is suitable for your chosen language – the one you are most familiar and comfortable

with. We recommend having a development environment and your favorite testing framework ready,

so that you can start coding right away.

You will screen share this with your interviewer. If you are not able to have an IDE set up on your own

computer, let us know prior to the start of the interview and we will have a CodePair environment

ready for you.

Each coding interview is capped at 60 minutes and is structured to help demonstrate coding skills,

code quality, and conceptual thinking. Atlassian also assesses for adaptability in an ever-changing

environment, navigating blockers, and communication style.

How to prepare:

   ·

If you need a CodePair environment setup please reach out to your CX Coordinator prior to the

interview and they will arrange this for you in advance.

   · Use an IDE and computer you are familiar with to make the most efficient use of your time in

the interview.

   · Please download zoom prior to your interview as you will utilise this to share screens during

the interview, whether this is onsite or remote.

   ·

If your interview is a zoom interview, find a quiet and comfortable space with consistent internet

access. Log on ~10 minutes early to ensure all systems and hardware are working correctly.

   · Using a debugger is welcome and encouraged.

Communication

Demonstrating how you think and approach problem solving is equally important as the end result.

Please communicate with your interviewer throughout each session, so they understand your

thought process.

Testing

We want to see best practice and testing is crucial to success in the code task. If you haven’t tested

in a while, we strongly recommend brushing up on testing, in particular the TDD approach.

Problem solving

Because problems are rarely limited to a single solution,  please showcase all possible solutions

and why the approach you selected is the best fit. Highlighting other solutions helps the interviewer

understand your thought process.

SYSTEM DESIGN INTERVIEW

The system design portion of the interview is 60 minutes. The purpose of the system design

interview is for you to demonstrate technical depth, breadth, and proficiency through designing

a solution to an established problem. Your interviewer will be looking at your problem-solving

thought process, decision making and operational considerations such as performance and

reliability.

How to prepare:

Seek first to understand

You’ll be asked to design a solution for a technical problem on a whiteboard or paper — starting

with fundamentals and then building in complexity. Ask any clarifying questions upfront to

ensure you understand the problem and then continue to communicate with your interviewer as

you progress towards a solution. If your interview is via zoom, ensure you have a paper and pen

available for the technical problem, alternatively, you can use the whiteboard function in zoom.

Another option is to screen share an editor or drawing tool of your choice.

Communication

We want to understand your approach to problem-solving and how you draw from past

experiences when designing something new. Keep the customer in mind and how your solution

might perform and scale.

MANAGEMENT INTERVIEW

The Management Interview is a 60-minute interview with one of our engineering managers

that will focus on how you approach various aspects of your role in a team environment.

Our questions will be scenario-based, so please come prepared with examples that

demonstrate your experience across one or more projects that you have been a part of or

have led.

How to prepare:

Think about project(s) that best represent the scope of work where you have had

measurable impact, learnt lessons and felt stretched. These projects don’t always have to be

your best or most recent ones. In addition, think about times in your career where you have

had to work together with other teammates, teams or customers to achieve meaningful

outcomes together.

This will be a structured interview where we will ask questions that will dig into four

primary areas:

   · Your ability to drive outcomes across the software development lifecycle

   · How you apply lessons learnt on the job and share them

   · Your ability to manage conflict across various situations

   · How you take initiative, lead and inspire in your role

In addition to the above, we are keen to understand how you collaborate with your teams

and get a deeper sense on your passions and ambitions to ensure the role is in fact the right

one for you.

VALUES INTERVIEW

The Values interview is 45 minutes and includes a set of behavioural interview questions, aimed at

assessing how your thought process and actions are aligned with our core set of company values.

How to prepare:

We recommend reviewing Atlassian’s values and use them as the foundation of your preparation.

Come prepared with relevant examples/stories of how you’ve demonstrated living these values in

your current or previous roles and projects.

Be the change you seek

When have you advocated to push for change? What did you learn from

this process? What was the outcome?

Play, as a team

How do you work with other people? How have you helped make a team/

individual more successful if they weren’t performing well? Have you ever

had to put the team’s goals above personal ambitions?

Don’t fuck the customer

How is your mentality ‘user-centred’? How have you put the customer

first? What trade-off(s) did you make to do this?

Open company, no bullshit

What’s your approach when having difficult conversations? How have you

resolved conflict in the past? Have you adapted your communication style

to achieve a better outcome in a potentially negative situation?

Build with heart and balance

How do you think about prioritisation and decision making? What are

examples when you or the team have missed the mark? How did you

react? How did you approach fixings things?

FINAL HELPFUL TIPS

Research

As with any interview, showcasing you’ve done some research will help you and the interviewer

get the most out of your time together. We suggest reviewing your interviewers on LinkedIn and

researching Atlassian to get a good feel of our culture and values.

Questions

Your interviewer will provide you with adequate time to ask questions so we recommend coming

prepared with questions/topics you’d like to learn more about. If for any reason there is a question

you don’t get the opportunity to ask during the interview, please reach out to your recruiter or

coordinator who can assist you.

As a side note, we run Global ShipIt days and our engineers love to talk about these – feel free to

watch a video on them here.

Finally, we want to ensure you have the very best possible candidate experience with us at

Atlassian, so please let us know if you need any accommodations or adjustments for

your interview.

Best of luck!

Disclaimer

Atlassian reserves the right to amend and/or supplement the mentioned policies and/or programs

at any time at Atlassian’s discretion. If there are matters mentioned in this overview that are

covered by more specific policies with extended details and/or instructions, those specific policies

will prevail.

©2023 Atlassian. All Rights Reserved. CSD-5968_DRD-08/23

